.Dd May 18, 2026
.Dt ZM 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zm
.Nd Z-Manager archive utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar options
.Ar command
.Nm
.Fl cf
.Ar archive
.Op Ar create-options
.Ar paths ...
.Nm
.Fl xf
.Ar archive
.Op Ar extract-options
.Nm
.Fl tf
.Ar archive
.Op Ar list-options
.Nm
.Fl Tf
.Ar archive
.Op Ar test-options
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates, extracts, lists, tests, and plans archives.
The public command surface is designed for scriptable stdout and human-readable
diagnostics on stderr.
.Pp
ZIP, TAR.ZST, TZAP, and 7z have native backends.
RAR extraction uses the bundled extraction-only RAR backend.
Other supported archive formats fall back to libarchive.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "formats"
.It Cm create Ar archive Ar paths ...
Create an archive.
.It Cm extract Ar archive
Extract an archive.
.It Cm list Ar archive
List archive contents.
.It Cm test Ar archive
Test archive readability or integrity.
.It Cm plan Ar paths ...
Show what
.Cm create
would archive.
.It Cm formats
Show supported archive formats.
.It Cm doctor
Verify the installed CLI and archive engine.
.It Cm completions Ar bash|zsh|fish|powershell
Print a shell completion script.
.It Cm help Op Ar command
Show top-level help or command-specific help.
.El
.Sh GLOBAL OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--no-password-prompt"
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show help.
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Show version.
.It Fl q , Fl -quiet
Reduce output.
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Increase diagnostics.
.It Fl -json
Emit JSON where supported.
.It Fl -color Cm auto Ns | Ns Cm always Ns | Ns Cm never
Control color output for human-readable help, summaries, diagnostics, and
progress.
The default
.Cm auto
colors terminal streams and honors
.Ev NO_COLOR .
.Cm always
forces color and
.Cm never
disables it.
.It Fl -no-color
Alias for
.Fl -color Cm never .
.It Fl -progress Cm auto Ns | Ns Cm always Ns | Ns Cm never
Control progress output.
.It Fl -no-progress
Alias for
.Fl -progress Cm never .
.It Fl -no-password-prompt
Fail instead of prompting interactively.
.It Fl c , Fl -create
Create an archive in classic syntax.
.It Fl x , Fl -extract
Extract an archive in classic syntax.
.It Fl t , Fl -list
List archive contents in classic syntax.
.It Fl T , Fl -test
Test archive integrity in classic syntax.
.It Fl f , Fl -file Ar archive
Archive file path in classic syntax.
.El
.Sh CREATE OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--preserve-symlinks"
.It Fl r , Fl -recursive
Accepted for ZIP familiarity; directories recurse by default.
.It Fl C , Fl -directory Ar dir
Use
.Ar dir
as the base for following input paths.
.It Fl @
Read input paths from stdin.
.It Fl -files-from Ar file|-
Read input paths from a file, or stdin with
.Sq - .
.It Fl -null
Read NUL-delimited path lists with
.Fl @
or
.Fl -files-from .
.It Fl -clean
Apply clean source exclusions.
.It Fl -no-ignore
Ignore
.Pa .gitignore
and default exclusion rules.
.It Fl -hidden
Accepted for compatibility; hidden files are included by default.
.It Fl -no-hidden
Exclude hidden dotfiles.
.It Fl i , Fl -include Ar glob
Include archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -exclude Ar glob
Exclude archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -exclude-from Ar file
Read exclude globs from
.Ar file .
.It Fl -format Cm zip Ns | Ns Cm tar.zst Ns | Ns Cm tzap Ns | Ns Cm 7z
Override format inference from the archive extension.
.It Fl -method Ar method
Select compression method.
.It Fl -level Ar level
Compression level.
.It Fl 0 ... Fl 9
Compression presets; level 0 stores ZIP entries.
.It Fl -store
Store ZIP entries without compression.
.It Fl -solid
Use solid 7z mode.
.It Fl -no-solid
Disable solid 7z mode.
.It Fl -volume-size Ar size
Split ZIP or 7z output into volumes.
Sizes accept bytes or
.Cm k ,
.Cm m ,
.Cm g ,
and
.Cm t
suffixes.
ZIP writes
.Pa .z01/.zip
sets; 7z writes
.Pa .7z.001
sets.
.It Fl j , Fl -junk-paths
Store basenames only; fail if flattened names collide.
.It Fl y , Fl -preserve-symlinks
Store symlink entries where the backend supports them.
.It Fl -follow-symlinks
Archive symlink target contents.
.It Fl -preserve-metadata
Preserve portable metadata where supported.
.It Fl X , Fl -no-metadata
Omit portable metadata where supported.
.It Fl -force
Replace an existing output archive.
.It Fl -dry-run
Print planned entries without writing the archive.
.It Fl T , Fl -test-after
Test the archive after writing.
.It Fl -encrypt
Prompt for an archive password where supported.
.It Fl -password-stdin
Read one password line from stdin.
TZAP archives are encrypted; use
.Fl -encrypt
or
.Fl -password-stdin
when creating them.
.El
.Sh EXTRACT OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--strip-components"
.It Fl C , Fl d , Fl -directory Ar dir
Extract into
.Ar dir .
.It Fl -here
Extract into the current directory.
.It Fl -overwrite Cm never Ns | Ns Cm always Ns | Ns Cm ask Ns | Ns Cm rename
Existing file policy.
The default is
.Cm never .
.It Fl i , Fl -include Ar glob
Extract archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -exclude Ar glob
Exclude archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -strip-components Ar n
Remove
.Ar n
leading path components before writing.
.It Fl -to-stdout
Write selected regular file bytes to stdout.
.It Fl -extract-nested
Expand known package payloads; currently
.Pa .deb .
.It Fl -password-stdin
Read one password line from stdin.
.El
.Sh LIST OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--password-stdin"
.It Fl l , Fl -long
Show type, size, compressed size, and path.
.It Fl -name-only
Print archive paths only.
.It Fl -tree
Print a simple hierarchical tree.
.It Fl i , Fl -include Ar glob
List archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -exclude Ar glob
Exclude archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -password-stdin
Read one password line from stdin.
.It Fl -json
Emit machine-readable JSON.
.El
.Sh TEST OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--password-stdin"
.It Fl i , Fl -include Ar glob
Test archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -exclude Ar glob
Exclude archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -password-stdin
Read one password line from stdin.
.It Fl -json
Emit machine-readable JSON.
.El
.Sh PLAN OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--exclude-from"
.It Fl -format Cm zip Ns | Ns Cm tar.zst Ns | Ns Cm tzap Ns | Ns Cm 7z
Plan for a specific archive format.
.It Fl C , Fl -directory Ar dir
Use
.Ar dir
as the base for following input paths.
.It Fl @
Read input paths from stdin.
.It Fl -files-from Ar file|-
Read input paths from a file, or stdin with
.Sq - .
.It Fl -null
Read NUL-delimited path lists with
.Fl @
or
.Fl -files-from .
.It Fl -clean
Apply clean source exclusions.
.It Fl -no-ignore
Ignore
.Pa .gitignore
and default exclusion rules.
.It Fl i , Fl -include Ar glob
Include archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -exclude Ar glob
Exclude archive paths matching
.Ar glob .
.It Fl -exclude-from Ar file
Read exclude globs from
.Ar file .
.It Fl -json
Emit machine-readable JSON.
.El
.Sh GLOB FILTERS
Glob patterns match archive paths after command-specific path processing.
Quote patterns so the shell does not expand them first.
Use
.Sq dir/**
for a whole tree;
.Sq *
can match
.Sq / .
.Sh SUPPORTED FORMATS
.Bl -tag -width "tar.zst"
.It Cm zip
Create
.Pa .zip ;
extract/list/test
.Pa .zip ,
.Pa .zipx ,
.Pa .jar ,
.Pa .war ,
.Pa .ipa ,
.Pa .apk ,
.Pa .appx ,
and
.Pa .xpi .
.It Cm tar.zst
Create and extract
.Pa .tar.zst
and
.Pa .tzst .
.It Cm tzap
Create, extract, list, and test passphrase-protected
.Pa .tzap
archives.
.It Cm 7z
Create and extract
.Pa .7z .
.It Cm raw
Extract raw single-file streams:
.Pa .zst ,
.Pa .gz ,
.Pa .bz2 ,
.Pa .xz ,
.Pa .lzma ,
.Pa .lz ,
.Pa .br ,
.Pa .lz4 ,
.Pa .lzo ,
.Pa .Z ,
and
.Pa .lrz .
.It Cm rar
Extract
.Pa .rar
and
.Pa .cbr .
Passworded RAR list/extract uses the bundled RAR backend with
.Fl -password-stdin .
.It Cm fallback
Other libarchive-supported formats.
.El
.Sh PASSWORD HANDLING
Passwords should flow through stdin or the interactive prompt.
Do not pass passwords as command arguments.
Use
.Fl -password-stdin
with a single line on stdin in scripts.
.Sh SHELL COMPLETIONS
Release packages install bash, zsh, and fish completions where supported.
For manual setup, print the completion script for a shell:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
source <(zm completions bash)
zm completions zsh > ~/.zfunc/_zm
zm completions fish > ~/.config/fish/completions/zm.fish
zm completions powershell > zm.ps1
.Ed
.Sh STDOUT AND JSON
Human diagnostics, progress, and errors are written to stderr.
Data modes such as
.Fl -to-stdout
and JSON modes write their payloads to stdout.
JSON and raw data payloads are never colorized.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width "2"
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Operation failed.
.It 2
Usage error.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zm -cf project.zip project/
zm create source.tar.zst src README.md --format tar.zst
zm extract project.zip -C out/ --include 'docs/**'
zm extract project.tar.zst --strip-components 1 -C out/
zm list project.zip --tree
zm test project.zip --json
printf '%s\n' "$ZM_PASSWORD" | zm create secret.7z private/ --encrypt --password-stdin
printf '%s\n' "$RAR_PASSWORD" | zm extract secret.rar -C out/ --password-stdin
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tar 1 ,
.Xr zip 1
